-- tag typescript
-- title Note: Overview of js ecosystem
-- date 2020-07-30
-- source https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TPm-UhWkiq8&t=646s
          https://blog.logrocket.com/how-javascript-works-optimizing-the-v8-compiler-for-efficiency/
          https://blog.sessionstack.com/how-javascript-works-inside-the-v8-engine-5-tips-on-how-to-write-optimized-code-ac089e62b12e
          https://github.com/sq/JSIL/wiki/Optimizing-dynamic-JavaScript-with-inline-caches
          https://docs.google.com/document/u/1/d/1hOaE7vbwdLLXWj3C8hTnnkpE0qSa2P--dtDvwXXEeD0/pub
          https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Inheritance_and_the_prototype_chain#:~:text=Each%20object%20has%20a%20private,with%20null%20as%20its%20prototype.&text=Nearly%20all%20objects%20in%20JavaScript,top%20of%20a%20prototype%20chain.
          https://mrale.ph/blog/2012/06/03/explaining-js-vms-in-js-inline-caches.html
          https://github.com/thlorenz/v8-perf/blob/master/compiler.md#collecting-feedback-via-ics
          https://darksi.de/d.sea-of-nodes/
;;
# Note: Overview of js ecosystem
Some overview of support for js as a language. Frameworks like React and vue doesn't count as language support since they are stand alone project.

## node overview
##### 1. event loop

##### 2. libuv

##### 3. web assembly

##### 4. timer

##### 5. apis

##### 6. libuv

## babel
Babel is not only a compiler between different verions of javascript today. As a layer before producing runtime code, a lot of compiler technics can be applied at this level.

##### code transformation

##### visitor pattern on AST.

##### build ast.

##### babal plugin

##### babel macro

## Runtime
##### v8 overview
Three statges of execution
1. parser generate AST
2. Interpreter called `Ignition` will generate bytecode from the AST.
3. Compiler `TurboFan` generate graph from bytecode, and replacing  sections of bytecode with optimized machine code.

##### JIT process
Interpreter has very little room for optimization because of the lack of information upon execution. But compiling the entire source code takes too long for large code base. Maintaining a good balance is very important for JIT.

When first executing a peice of code, `Profiler` will run it through interpreter, and makes profiling informations like how often a function is invoked. This will tag different code segments as warm code segments and `hotspots`. Warm code segments will be compiled by baseline compiler, which compile faster. `Hotspots` will be compiled by optimized compiler (`-O2`), it compiles slower, but its more beneficialsince `hotspot` code get invoked very frequently.

Assumptions are made by optimized compiler when compiling `hotspot` code. But when those assumptions are invalidated you need `deoptimization` to discard the optimized code.

```
(SRC) → ⟨ Parser ⟩
  ⇒ (AST) → ⟨ Bytecode Generator ⟩
  ⇒ (bytecode sequence) → ⟨ TurboFan ⟩
  ⇒ (optimized machine code)
```
##### balance between interpreter and compiler
Compilation takes time. Storing optimized code also takes time. If a piece of code is interpreted it doesn't have those upfront compiling overhead and memory overhead, but it also lost any opportunities of optimization.

##### GC
V8 use generational mark-and-sweep based garbage collector. Different from traditional generational gc is v8 use incremental marking, which only mark part of the heap for each pause, and continue to mark the next part of the rest from where it stopped in the last pause. This allow shorter pause during execution.

##### Compliation pipeline with learning
Compilation is based on feedbacks collected from profiling.
```
(SRC) =|Interpreter⟩
  ⇒ (bytecode sequence) ∧ (feedback vector).  <+
                                               |
  =|TurboFan⟩ ⇒ {                              |
    good ? =>  (optimized machine code)        |
    doesn't works out ? => |deoptimization⟩----+
  }
```

##### hidden class based object layout
Encode the layout of object. The hidden class might change in runtime if the object's shape is get mutated.
```javascript
let o = {x: 1}
o.y = 2
```
At the first line and the second line the hidden class for object o migrates like this
```
Map M        Map N
------  ->  -------
x: 1          x: 1
              y: 2
```
Bot `Map M` and `Map N` are kept in the memory, and the arrow is also stored to indicate how the shape of object is migrated. Not the order of adding properties will result as another hidden class, so it is possible that you have two hidden classes for the same type of object.

##### inline caching (IC).
Repeated call to the same method tend to have the same type of object. If we know the type of object upfont, we don't need to ask for how the object is structured and how do we access it. Inline caching will cache the object's `hidden class`, and at the next time of the function call it can use the cached information to address object properties directly.
Specifically, after two successful call of a function to objects with the same hidden class, v8 will assume all calls afterwards are calling with the same hidden class, and jump directly to the memory address of a specific property based on the offset of that hidden class.


##### ignition
Has a `Bytecode Generator` which bytecodes into sequence of bytecodes. Bytecode sequences are basic unit of code segments. The interpreter will run those sequence and collect feedbacks for profiling.

##### Turbo Fan
A compile backend.
- instruction selection and scheduling.
- register allocation.
- code gen.
- speculative optimization based on feedback collected from interpreter.
- architecture specific optimization.
`Hotspot` are usually get compiled and optimized here. But compiling itself cost a lot too.

##### Sea of Nodes

##### "morphisms" of function
- monomorphic: operations that hidden classes of arguments are always the same
- polymorphic: 2-4 different types seen.
- megamorphic: more types then polymorphic
The less types an operation has the easier it is to optimize. V8 stop optimize megamorphic code.

##### pointer compression


##### exploit v8
__1__ Hidden class related (keey data the same shape so they can share the same hidden class):
  - Instantiate objects' properties in the same order.
  - Avoid dynamically adding property. If possible, instantiating all properties up front.

__2__ Inline caching related.
  - Run the same method repeatdely is more optimized than run many methods only once.

## JS builtin (by standard)
Overall of all JS builtin. Js has more builtin than most other languages, everything kinda floating in the global scope. It is probably because of this initial intention as being a scripting language.
##### 1. values
- Infinity
- NaN
- undefined (Note `undefined` is a builtin value property, but `null` is not)
- globalThis.

##### 2. functions
- eval() (metaprogramming can use it. but even for metaprogramming this is way too filthy)
- isFinite()
- isNaN()
- parseFloat()
- parseInt()
- encodeURI() (replacing each instance of some chars into escape seq for transfer)
- encodeURIComponent()
- decodeURI()
- decodeURIComponent()
Some functions like `parseInt` really should not be in global namespace.

##### 3. Objects
- Object
  - Object.assign(target, source) (copy to target)
  - Object.create(obj) (also by copying)
  - Object.defineProperty(obj, 'pop', val) (like `setattr` in python)
  - Object.freeze() (immutable object)
  - Object.fromEntries(list) (it's like constructor of `Map` but for `Object`)
  - Object.getOwnPropertyDescriptor(obj. prop) (Property descriptor is descriptor in python)
  - Object.getOwnPropertyNames(obj)
  - Object.is(other) (identity check)
  - Object.isForzen() (check immutability)
  - Object.setPrototypeOf(obj, prototype) (substitute the prototype.)
- Function
- Boolean
- Symbol (uniqueness)
At runtime js only recognize this four objects. These plus primitive can be tested with `typeof`.
`Object` is really an unordered hash table.

##### 4. Erros
- Error (Really it should be called runtime error)
- AggregateError (Error Burritos. In haskell it can be easily done with Either and applicative)
- EvalError (Filthy)
- RangeError (IndexOutOfBound?)
- ReferenceError (As it called. Dangling pointer)
- SyntaxError
- TypeError (This is a joke)
- URIError (This is way too specific)

##### 5. Numbers
- Math (this is a singleton namespace)
- BigInt (arbitrary digit integer. The primitive `number` max at 2^53 -1)
- Number (`1` is `double`, but `1|0` will coerce to integer)
- Date (11 is Dec !!! I failed multiple times on this)

##### 6. Text processing
- String
  - String.raw() (return a string created from a raw template string)
  - String.fromCharCode(num1 [, ...])
  - String.fromCodePoint(num1 [, ...])
- RegExp
__1__. What's the difference between CharCode and CodePoint? CharCode is utf-16 and CodePoint is Unicode. Why don't they use a better name for them? No idea.
__2__. RegExp can be constructed by it's syntax sugar or by constructor. I don't thinn regex is special enough to deserve it's own syntax, so I probably use constructed more often.

##### 7. Indexed Collections
- Array (mutable, heterogenous array list)
  - Array.from() (You can not iterate over a `IterableIterator`, This is your Iterator. HAHA)
  - Array.isArray()
  - Array.of() (it's `pure` for Array Applicative)
  - Array.prototye.slice() (main function for immutability. You copy rather mutate.)
  - Array.prototye.fill() (can be handy sometimes)
  - Array.prototye.forEach() It' map over `IO ()`
- Int8Array
  - Int8Array.property.buffer() (return A``ArrayBuffer``)
- UInt8Array
- Int8CampedArray (like UInt8Array but value won't overflow but bounded.)
- Int16Array
- UInt16Array
- Int32Array
- UInt32Array
- Float32Array
- Float64Array
- BigInt64Array (Why does it needs a `BIG` prefix when it comes to Int64?)
- BitUInt64Array
All this besides Array are called `TypedArray`, which are essentially different views of `ArrayBuffer`. You have all this fine grinded control over array element but no real standalone Int32 type..

##### 8. Keyed Collection
- Map ([`Deterministic Hash Table`](https://wiki.mozilla.org/User:Jorend/Deterministic_hash_tables) ordered by insertion order in iteration)
- Set (same implementation as `Map`)
- WeakMap (Like `WeakKeyMap` in `python`, avoid memory leak)
- WeakSet
This is hash table based collection. `WeakRef` is added to avoid awkward WeakMap work around.

##### 9. Structured data
- ArrayBuffer (fixed length byte array like you do all the time in C. You modify it via view like Typed Array.)
- SharedArrayBuffer (Shared Memory. Used for sharing data between workers)
- Atomics (namespace for atomic operations)
  - Atomics.add() Atomics.sub() Atomics.and() Atomics.or() Atomics.xor()
  - Atomics.compareExchange() (same as `test exchange`)
  - Atomics.exchange() (simply swap)
  - Atomics.wait() (unix `wait`)
  - Atomics.notfy() (notify waiting on the specifed index of the array)
  - Atomics.load() Atomics.store()
- DataView (Normalize endianness)
- JSON
  - JSON.parse(text) (parse into js object)
  - JSON.stringify(val) (from value to json)
__1__. Typically how you use `ArrayBuffer` is to create the buffer with bytes it holds, and create a new `TypedArray` on top of it to access it's content.
__2__. Shared data are based on TypedArray (SharedArrayBuffer). Even load, store are operations to help works with the shared buffer easier.
__3__. One thing to notice about JSON is that json has much simpler grammar rule, so it is faster to parse than javascript. So if there are a lot of data initialization, put them in one JSON file rather than javascript source code can improve the parsing performance. (Because of JIT Parsing speed is also an important performance factor of code execution)

##### 10. Control abstraction objects
- Promise (Future. One thing to note is `async await` sugar works for it. Some static methods comes very handy but few people use them)
  - Promise.all(iter) wait for all promises to resovle or any to be rejected.
  - Promise.any(iter) negation of `all`
  - Promise.race(iter) just return the value of the first resolved promise.
  - Promise.resolve(value) `pure` for promise
  - Promise.reject(reason) `pure` for promise error
- Generator (Just like python generator)
  - Generator.prototype.next()
  - Generator.prototype.return()
  - Generator.prototype.throw()
- GeneratorFunction (type for `function*(){}`)
- AsyncFunction (type for `async function(){}`)
__1__. Promise chaining style is really like monad sequencing...
__2__. Generator are good for making lazy data structure.
__3__. Async function is sugar (IRRELEVANT).

##### 11. Reflection
- Reflect (yet another namespace object, provides some interface to do runtime reflection)
  - Reflect.has(val, prop)
  - Reflect.ownKeys(val)
  - etc ...
- Proxy (target and handler)
Proxy is kinda like overwrite python descriptor. But rather override the default behavior here you make a new interaface on top of the original object.

## prototype chain
##### 1. null has no prototype
As it is.

##### 2. null has no prototype
