-- tag note llvm compiler haskell
-- title llvm-hs
-- date 2020-08-13
-- source https://hackage.haskell.org/package/llvm-hs-pure
;;
# Some llvm-hs

## Overview
LLVM is designed to be as modular as possible, as long as a binding can bind all the apis, you can have the full contorl over llvm. There is an official llvm ocaml binding, and that's what rust was initially written in. `llvm-hs` is the haskell equivalence of ocaml llvm binding. To use `llvm-hs` you need two libraries: `llvm-hs` and `llvm-hs-pure`. `llvm-hs-pure` provides pure types and functions for haskell to interact with llvm; `llvm-hs` use with FFI binding to llvm.

Once you have the IR representation you can choose either generate obeject code or jit compile the module.

To interact with the llvm library requires you first have the c++ representation of an LLVM Module. This needs you to construct the IR with `llvm-hs-pure` first, then convert it to c++ representation with `withModuleFromAST` in `llvm-hs`.

```
-- possible work flow.

`llvm-pure-hs` -> IR haskell representation -> `llvm-hs` -> IR c++ representation -> `withModuleFromAST` -> gen
```

Also you can choose to eitehr generate object code or jit compile.

## llvm-hs-pure
`llvm-hs-pure` provides an algebraic data type representation of LLVM IR, and some handy utils to work with IR. No actual llvm binding here.


#### LLVM.AST
List of some noticable structure.
```
    Module ← Definition ← & Global ← BasicBlock ← Instruction ← Operand ← `Constant`
                          & Type ←
```

##### Module
A `Module` has some meta data plus a list of `Definition`. A `Definition` contains anythings that can be at the top level of a LLVM Module. For instance, global, type definition, function attributes etc.

##### Global
There are some build in default `Global`s, namely `globalVariableDefaults`, `globalAliasDefaults`, `functionDefaults`. They are designed to helo make `Global` easier.

##### BasicBlock
LLVM code in a function is a sequence of `BasicBlock`s, each one has their own label, some instructions, and a terminator. `BasicBlock` contains `Instruction`, which is defined in `LLVM.AST.Instruction`

##### Instruction
`Instruction` represent non-terminator instructions like `%result = add i32 %1, %b`. These instructions are defined in llvm IR, you cannot make whatever. `Instruction` contains `Operands`, which serves as parameter to the instruction.

##### Terminator
In contrast with `Instruction`, `Terminator` are instruction that ends a basic block. Such terminator can be `ret`, `br`, `swithc`, `invoke` etc.

Note for `invoke` there is an option called `CallingConvention`, which allows you to decide what calling convention to use.

##### Operand
`Operand` is used by `Instruction`, and it contains `Constant`. Note there is also `CallableOperand` which can be invoked by `Instruction` `Call`  `Call` is a non-terminator.

##### Constant
Defined in `LLVM.AST.Constant`. Constant contains stuffs like `Int { intergerBits :: Word32, integerValue :: Integer}`.

##### Type
Define some elements of the LLVM type system.


#### LLVM.IRBuilder
`IRBuilder` helps reduce the verbosity of dealing with AST directly.

##### `IRBuilderT m a`
Mtl that helps you to create instruction and insertingthem into a basic block at any location.

##### `block :: MonadIRBuilder m => m Name`
Starts a new block and ends the previous one

##### `currentBlock :: MonadIRBuilder m => m Name`
Get the name of the current active block.

## llvm-hs
`llvm-hs` build on top of llvm and it is the actual biding of llvm library. It provides bidirectional conversions between haskell representation of a module to c++ representation.

#### LLVM.Module

##### `Module`
Binding to c++ representation of Module. On the haskell side it will be represented as LLVM.AST.Module

##### `File`
A newtype used to distinguish string for path from other strings.

##### `Context`
Context object holds the state of LLVM system needs for one threaed of LLVM compilation. Multiple conetxt allows multiple threads to compile at once.
