-- tag note nodejs async event-loop epoll reactor-pattern
-- title nodejs
-- date 2020-08-08
-- source https://blog.insiderattack.net/five-misconceptions-on-how-nodejs-works-edfb56f7b3a6
          http://www.dre.vanderbilt.edu/~schmidt/PDF/reactor-siemens.pdf
          https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2032598/caveats-of-select-poll-vs-epoll-reactors-in-twisted
          https://stackoverflow.com/questions/56739934/is-nodejs-representing-reactor-or-proactor-design-pattern#:~:text=So%20node.,examples%20of%20Proactor%20design%20pattern.
;;
# NodeJS overview
Some big pic of how nodejs is structured.

## Building blocks
```
===================================================
                 NodeJs stdlib
===================================================
                node C++ bindings
===================================================
 v8 | libuv | c-ares | http parser | crypto | zlib
===================================================
```

## Reactor Pattern
[Reactor pattern](http://www.dre.vanderbilt.edu/~schmidt/PDF/reactor-siemens.pdf) is a event handling pattern for handling requests delivered concurrenlty to a handler with one or more inputs. The handler then demultiplexes the incoming requests and dispatches them synchronously to the associated handlers. -- wiki

#### Event loop logic
1. Event demutiplexer receives IO request then delegate to low level units for performing the IO.
2. Once the IO is done, event demutiplexer will then push the corresponding callback handler into the `event queue`.
3. Events are executed sequentially in the order they were received when they are available to be processed.
4. This process will repeat until either there is no event in the event queue or no pending IO request in the demultiplexer.

#### Event loop digram.
```
                 1. incoming IO request
                            ↓        5. event loop run event handler
 +==============+      +==========+         +=============+
 |    event     |←-----|Event loop|←--------|_____________|
 |demultiplexer |      +==========+         |_____________|
 +==============+                           | event queue |
    |     ↑     +-------------------------→ +=============+
   2↓    3|         4. enqueue event
 +==============+
 | Low level IO |
 +==============+
```

This is a high level overview of the reactor pattern, the actual node implementation is more complicated than this. In ndoe there are multiple event queues and there are more event types than IO event alone.

#### Event Demultiplexer
Asynchrnous IO funcitionalities are provided via system call: in linux it uses `epoll` (system call for IO event notification). However, many IO are not directly supported. For instance, `epoll` only support asynchronous network IO but not file IO.

##### Hareware asynchronous IO and thread pool.
[This paper](http://www.dre.vanderbilt.edu/~schmidt/PDF/reactor-siemens.pdf) assumes all IO operations are provided by `select` linux system call, but it is not the case in node. Node need to perform more types of IO operations than those supported by `select` alone. For those that are not directly supported by the hardware, node needs a thread pool to handle the IO in parallel in order to avoid blocking. After the thread finished the IO operation it will notify the event demultiplexer, and the returned value (`handle` in the paper) will be dispatched with its corresponding callback and be pushed into the event queue.

##### Another way to look at it
Node will use hardware IO as much as possible, but when it is not supported it will use the thread pool.

So on another hand, if the operating system doesn't provide interfaces like `epoll`, all operations can be done through the thread pool, so the whole event loop becomes something like a convey belt feeding IO request to thread pool and fetch the result later. It's a way to achieve "multi-threading", but only on IOs.

##### Not only IO
Some computational intensive operations like encryptions are treated as IO operations in node. Because encryption algorithms are very computational intensive, they are likely to block the js thread. Treating them as asynchronous IO operations meaning node's api for this CPU bound computations are always concurrent.

##### `epoll`
In linux the hardware asynchronous IO is provided via `epoll`. What it does is essentially monitoring multiple file descriptors to see whether IO is possible on any of them. When the original paper of reactor pattern was written it was using the older version called `select`, but in newer linux `select` is replace for better performance. Inernally `epoll` use red black tree to keep track of file descriptors being monitored.

#### Event Queue
Callbacks with value returned from IO operations in event demutiplexer together will be pushed into the event queue and get executed sequentially by the event loop. There is only one event queue in reactor pattern, but in node different types of events have their own type of queue.

##### Types of queues
- Expired timers and intervals queue (callback pushed by `setTimeout` and `setInterval`). PS: Timers are actually stored in a min heap.
- IO events queue (network IO, file IO, etc.)
- Immediates queue (callback pushed by `setImmediate`)
- Close Handlers queue (`close` event handlers)
- Next tick queue (callback pushed by `proces.nextTick`)
- Microtask queue (other tasks like resolved promise callbacks)

#####  Event Queue phases .
nextTick and promise callback are processed between each timer and immediate callback.

```
start of the loop
                      +=========================+
-----+---------------→| Expired Timer callbakcs | -------------+
     ↑                | setTimeout/setInterval  |              |
     |                +=========================+              |
     |                           |                             |
     |                           ↓                             |
     |                +========================+               ↓
+=============+       | process.nextTick cb    |          +=========+
|close handler|-----→ |------------------------| ←--------|IO events|
+=============+       |Microtasks (promise cb) |          +=========+
     ↑                +========================+               |
     |                           ↑                             |
     |                           |                             |
     |                   +===============+                     |
     +-------------------|Immediate queue| ←-------------------+
                         +===============+     IO polling
                                            waiting for pending io
                                            to complete if there are
                                            no events in other queues
```
- The event loop will check items in each queue in a order as the digram shows above.
- When checking each queue, as long as there are handlers in the queue, the event loop will fetch them to stack and execute.
- Next tick queue and microtask queue will be vistited whenever on of other queue is vistited. This gives them a higher priority.
- Upon each vist the event loop will try to execute all handlers in the queue.

##### Next tick queue & miroctask queue
Next tick queue has higher priority than microtask queue.

##### IO starvation
As described above, next tick queue is emptied in between of all other queues, so if the main thread keep filling tasks into next tick queue, the program will be stucked without moving forward.

## EventEmitter
####  Overview
Event driven pattern is used intensively in node apis. An `EventEmitter` holds and manage events and there corresponding listenders. you have an `emitter` emits certain event (a string), which will cause a listenders to be called.

All objects that emit events are instance of `EventEmitter`. Typically function `emitter.on()` lets you bind listenders to a specific event, and `emitter.emit()` is called to trigger an event.

```javascript
class MyEmitter extends EventEmitter {}
const e = new MyEmitter();
e.on('event', function(a, b) => {
    // `this` is intentionally been set to `e`.
    console.log(a, b, this, this === e);
})
e.on('event1', (a, b) => {
    // with arrow function this referes to the function scope.
    console.log(a, b, this, this === e);
})
```

#### A rough digram of the structure of EventEmitter.
```
===================================================
            EventEmitter
===================================================
 events|  handlers
=======|===========================================
   e1  |   listener1(), listener2()
   e2  |   listener3(), listener4(), listener5()
   e3  |   listener6()
   ... |   ...
 error |   listener7()
===================================================
```

#### emit will call listeners synchrounously.
Take the digram above as an example, event `e2` has 3 listeners registerd to it. If `e.emit('e2')` is called, the emitter will call `listener3`, `listener4`, `listener5` sequentially, block the code until all three listeners are finished. The purpose of doing so is to avoid race conditions, but you are not limited with synchrounicity. If the nature of listeners will not cause race conditions, use `setImmediate` or `proces.nextTick` to switch to asychronous mode.

```typescript
e.on('event', (a, b) => {
    setImmediate(() => { console.log("run in async"); });
});
e.emit('event', 'a', 'b');
```

#### Handle errors
`error` event can be used to handle error of eventEmitter. If no listener is specified the error will be thrown by default. It's good practice to always provide error listener.

```typescript
e.on('error', err => {
    console.log(err);
});
e.emit('error', new Error('oops'));
```

#### Some apis
##### emitter.once(even, listener)
The listener registered will only be called once. When the event is fired for the first time the listener will be unregistered before it is called.

##### emitter.listenerCount(eventName)
Return the number of listeners for event `eventName`.

##### emitter.listeners(eventName)
Return a copy of event listeners for event `eventName`.

##### emitter.removeListener(eventName, listener)
Do what as the name suggests. It will remove at most one listener.

Note: listeners will be called in order, so while listeners are running `removeListener` will be blocked.

## Asynchrounicity.

#### Asynchrounous function
When a synchronous function is running it will occupy the stack for the whole time, causing the program be blocked.

Asynchrounous function will schedule some async tasks and return itself immediately. Doing so it will no longer occupy the stack, allows other part of the programming to run. When the async task is completed, the associated callback will be called and be put on the stack again.

In another word, there will be two stages of a asynchrnous function: in the first stage it will run until it schedules async task; in the second stage call the callback when the async task is done. Python used to use generator to simulate asynchrnous function. It makes sense because it helps you to give away control in the middle of the execution of a function.

The task get scheduled typically will be running on some lower level environment.

#### Callbacks that are simply CPS
Some callback are just synchrounous code in continuation passing style. To make a real asynchronous function one need to be able to access the event loop. In node there are several ways to achieve this.

#### Ways to call asynchrnous functions.
- Call js and node asychronous functions like `setTimeout`, `setImmediate`, `proces.nextTick`.
- Call Nodejs async apis.
- Promise
- Asynchrounous C++ addon.

## `select` `epoll` and reactor pattern
#### `select` system call get used by reactor pattern
Operating systems generally provide this mechanism of waking up a process when something happened. `select` is an example in linux to provide this functinality.

`select(numberOfWaits, read, write, err, timeout)` will keep track on `read`, `write`, and `err` file descriptors. It will blocks for up to timeout ms or if something happend on one of the file descriptors above.

But `select` blocks code, how does it helps with asynchronous IO? Turns out the event loop is acutally blocking, and the js code is evaluate in the blocking loop.

An example of how a `setTimeout` might looks like.
```c
while (1) {
    evaluateJs();
    timeout = calculateTimers();
    events = select(numberOfWaits, read, write, err, timeout);
    if (events > 0 || timersActive())  {
        getCallbacks(events, read, write, err, timers());
    }
}
```

#### Difference reactor and proactor patterns.
- reactor: To read a from socket, it subscribe a event which indicate the data is available. When the event is emitted, react to it synchrounously.
- proactor: To read a from socket, it initialize a reading operation that proactively reads the data.
