-- tag note typescript module async prototype-chain
-- title typescript modules and async in react.
-- date 2020-08-02
-- source https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/modules.html
          https://microsoft.github.io/TypeScript-New-Handbook/everything/#indexed-access-types
;;
# Typescript modules; async in react; prototype chain

## Modules in typescript

##### 1. Modules execute on their own scope
Like all modern module systems. If all functions are pure then the module is just a namespace. But if there is state, since the module is scoped it can serve as a container, avoiding global state.

##### 2. ECMAScript
Any file containing top-level import or export is considered a module. Otherwise the file is treated as a script.

##### 3. Re-export doesn't import value locally.
Re-export simply propagate the value to the next import.

##### 4. Export * from "module";
Export everthing. This can be used as top level export.

##### 5. Import for side effects.
If a module has no export, import it will simply execute it. It's useful for setting up an environment.

##### 6. Barrel.
Re-exporting everything in index.ts.

## Async in react.
Asynchronous requests can cause some problems in react component.

##### 1. Asynchronous response can arrive after a component is teared down.
Asynchronous response can arrive after the component is unmounted. This will cause a React's runtime exception, which is an error message. Not a big deal but it can be better.
```typescript
const ismounted = useRef<boolean>(true);

useEffect(() => {
    return () => { ismounted.current = false; };
}, []);

useEffect(() => {
    const f = async () => { if (ismounted.current) setValue(await ...); }
}, []);
```

##### 2. Race condition
`useEffect` can depend on some prop, and when the prop update useEffect might send the asynchronous request again before the previous reuqest resolved. If the second request arrive earlier it will cause a race condition. Solution is to cancel the previous request when sending a new request. Or maybe use sequence number?

## Code splitting
Webpack allows code splitting, which means it bundles your code into chunks, and each chunk and be download asynchronously. This allows to load a fast-to-load minial bundle, and adding more bundle asynchronously after that. So for instance in `create-react-app`, as long as there are no static files in `public` folder all codes will eventually be delivered to client side. But with code splitting this can happen in a non blocking manner so the load time doesn't feel so long.

## Link Local npm package
If you have two local package and one depends on another, you can use `npm link`. First create a global link in the library that is depended by running `npm link`, and in the package that depends on the first package run `npm link <dependency>`.

##### caveats
`npm link` doesn't auto compile. Everytime you changed your dependency you need to manually relink it to global sym links, and link from the main project again.

## Iterator and IterableIterator...
##### Down level iteration for ES5
An iteration over array or string will be simply compiled to a simple loop, but for a general iterator the compiler will needs to shove an entire implementation of the iterator protocol, which can bloat the code size.

## Promise are not evaluated lazily
Executor passed into the promise will be called immediately. All the chain calls are just methods to access the result of executor. I am a little bit surprised because I always thought promises are lazily evaluated. But if you think carefully about it there is no special reason for it to be so. Promise is designed to replace callback style asynchronous call, which you typically need to pass a callback to handle the value when it is arrived, and another callback to handle error case. With promise you don't pass these two functions into another async function, but rather wrap the entire async computation in a promise, then use `then` and `catch` to pass those callbacks.

## Common pattern type Class<T> = Function & { prototype: T }
Works like the classical linked list definition. `&` is use to add new properties to exist type. It's applicable with any types includes built-ins, so it's a good way to extend build-ins without touching oop.
```typescript
type LList<T> = T & { next LList<T>};
type Class<T> = Function & {prototype: T};
```

## You have abstract class in typescript
Never know it before.

## typeof at typelevel.
`typeof` can also be used at type level gives `decltype` style inference.
```typescript
function fn() { return {a: 1, b: 2}};
declare const b: ReturnType<typeof fn>;
```
A special case for `typeof` on const array literal.
```typescript
const data = ['a', 'b'] as const;
type Data = typeof data[number]; // "a" | "b"
```

## tsc configs
- noEmitOnError (refuse to compile when there is type error)
- noImplicitAny
- strictNullChecks (is on with `struct: true`)

## Prototype Chain Model
#### Why don't store methods in instance?
Methods won't change, but if you store them in the instance directly for each new ins you will need another copy of the function, and it can be a waste of memory.

Prototype sovle the problem by storing common properties of all instances who holds reference to it.

#### How to access prototype?
- `Object.getPrototypeOf(object) and Object.setPrototypeOf(object)` (standard)
- `o.__proto__` (all implementations have it)

`Note`:  `Func.prototype` is the property of the function that specifies the object which will be assigned as prototype of instances created by `Func`.

#### Inheriting "methods"
When an `inherited method` is called, `this` will points to the inheriting object. Rule of thumbs: value closer to the callsite in the prototype chain will be used.
```typescript
let o = {a: 2, m: function() {return this.a + 1}};
let p = Object.create(o);   // p inherits from o;
p.a = 20;
p.m();  // m will access 20 rather than 2.
```

#### How does different ways of creating objecte determine prototype chain.
##### Created with syntax contructs
Syntax contructs means value can be created with specific syntaxs like `{}`.

Some examples:

###### Syntax `const o = {a: 1}`
`o -> Object.prototype -> null`

###### Syntax `const b = [1, 2]`
`b -> Array.prototype -> Object.prototype -> null`

###### Syntax `const f = function () {return 2}`
`f -> Function.prototype -> Object.prototype -> null`

##### Created with a constructor.
Example from MDN
```typescript
function G() {
    this.vertices = []
    this.edges = []
}
G.prototype = {
    addVertex: function(v) {
        this.vertices.push(v);
    }
}
const g = new G();
```
Where each instance will have `vertices` and `edges`, and there prototype will have `addVertex` function.

`new` keyword gives functions a different semantic. Calling a function with `new` will bind a new object to `this` of the function body, set it's prototype to the function's prototype, and return it after the function returned. (normally return with void).
The prototype chain for `g` is:

```
g -> G.prototype -> Function.prototype -> Object.prototype -> null
```

###### Create with `Object.create(object)`
`Object.create` was introduced to make prototype inheritance easier to write. Name create is a little bit misleading beacuse it is not sheerly create an object, but create an object that inherit from another.

Again, example from mdn:
```typescript
let a = {a:1};
// a -> Object.prototype -> null

let b = Object.object(a);
// b -> a -> Object.prototype -> null

// b.a = 10 add a new property on instance b, which will
// shadow a in b's prototype.
// note: this will not be allowed in typescript.
b.a = 10

let d = Object.create(null)
// d -> null
d.hasOwnProperty === false;
```

##### Create with class
Class is really a sugar for prototype. Let's try to rewrite this class definition to prototype style...
```typescript
class Polygon {
    constructor(height, width) {
        this.height = heigh;
        this.width = width;
    }

    log() {
        console.log(`${this.heigh} x ${this.width}`);
    }
}
class Square extends Polygon {
    constructor(sideLength) {
        super(sideLength, sideLength);
    }
    area() {
        return this.heigh * this.width;
    }
    sideLength(newLength) {
        this.height = newLength;
        this.width = newLength;
    }
}
let square = new Square(2);
```

This goes to

```typescript
function Polygon(heigh, width) {
    this.heigh = heigh;
    this.width = width;
}
Polygon.prototype.log = function() {
    console.log(`${this.heigh} x ${this.width}`);
}

function Square(sideLength) {
    Polygon.call(this, sideLength, sideLength);
}

// chain Square's prototype with the new object inherit from
// Polygon.prototype.
// Square.prototype -> Polygon.prototype
Square.prototype = Object.create(Polygon.prototype);

Square.prototype.area = function() {return this.heighi * this.with};
Square.prototype.sideLength = function(sideLength) {
    this.heigh = sideLength;
    this.with = sideLength;
}
```

#### Performance problems.
1. Lookup for properties higher up on the chain is inefficient.
2. Trying to access nonexistent properties will end up traverse the entire chian.
3. All enumerable properties will be traversed when iterating over properties of an object.
4. `hasOwnProperty` will not traverse the chain. It will only check if the current object has certain property defined for itself. (In fact it is the only function that deal with prototype chain and does not traverse the entire chain).

#### Caveats
- Make sure there is no super long prototype chain, because it will cause performance issues (like long `mro` in python).
- Never extend native prototype. It's like change metaclass in python, which pollutes the entire class inheritance.
